ANNEXURE III
STANDARD LEASE AGREEMENT
AN AGREEMENT MADE .......................................... DAY..........................OF
……………………….
……………………………………………….…………………………………………...................
..............................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................
Herein after called ‘The Lessor’ (Which expression shall include its successors
assigns, administrator, liquidators and receivers, wherever the context of meaning
shall so require or permit) of the one part AND the PRESIDENT OF INDIA (herein
after referred as ‘THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’ or ‘Lessee’) of the other part.
WHERE BY IT IS AGREED AND DECLARED AS FOLLOWS:-
1. In consideration of the rent herein after reserved and of the other conditions
herein contained, the Lessor agrees to let out and Lessee agrees to take on lease the
land, hired it aments and premises known as………………...together with all
buildings and erections, fixtures and fittings, standing and being thereon (here in
after called “THE SAID PREMISES”) more particularly described in‘
SCHEDULE-‘A’.
2. The lease shall commence/shall be deemed to have been commenced on the
………………. Day of……………… and shall, subject to the terms hereof, continue for
a term of………. years with an option to extend the period of lease for a further term
as set out in clause 14 hereof.
3. The Lessee shall, subject to the terms hereof, pay gross rent in monthly
arrears for the said premises at the rate of Rs………… per month, which also
includes a sum of Rs………… towards maintenance and taxes per month. In the
event of the tenancy hereby created, being terminated as provided by these presents,
the Lessee shall pay only a proportionate part of the rent for the fraction of the
current month up to the date of such termination. The rate of rent hereby agreed is
not liable to revision during the period of lease or renewal, if any, of the lease and
can be considered for revision after the expiry of the four years from the start of the
lease or revision of the rent, provided that such revision shall not exceed 15% after
every four years of the rent payable at the time of such revision, such rent being
equivalent to gross rent reduced by the amount payable towards maintenance and
tax.
4. The said premises shall be deemed to include the fixtures and fittings
existing thereon as shown in ‘SCHEDULE-‘B’ and the Government of India shall
upon the expiration of the terms hereby created or any renewal thereof and subject
to clause 11 hereof yield up the said premises including fixtures and fittings in as
good a condition as received, fair wear and tear, damage by fire, act of god, riots or
other civil commotion, enemy action and/or other causes not within the control of
the Government of India excepted, PROVIDED THAT THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
shall not be responsible for any structural damage which may occur to the same
during the terms hereby created or any renewal thereof.
5. The Government of India shall be entitled to use the said premises for any
lawful purpose which is not detrimental to the interest of the landlord.
6. The Government of India shall have the right to sublet the whole or any part
or parts of the said premises but shall be responsible for the full payment of rent and
the term of such sub-lease shall not exceed the period of lease or extension thereof,
if any, as set out in Clause 2 hereinabove.
7. All existing and future rates, taxes including property tax, assessment
charges and other out-goings whatsoever of every description in respect of the said
premises payable by the owner thereof, shall be paid by the Lessor. The Lessor,
however, shall be entitled to recover additional levies, paid on account of
enhancement in taxes, from the Govt. of India and such recovery shall be
proportionate to the amount of taxes payable during the pendency of the lease. In
case the said premises is a portion of a building subject to payment of tax as one
entity, the liability of the Govt. of India in respect of payment of additional tax,
unless there has been any addition to the constructed portion of such building, shall
be in the same ratio as at the time of original letting. In case of some additional
construction having been made by the Lessors, additional tax payable by the Govt. of
India shall be as determined by the Central Public Works Department of the Govt. of
India. In case of default in payment of taxes etc. by the Lessor to the local bodies, it
would be open for the Lessee to deduct such dues from the gross rent (including
taxes) payable to the Lessor, and to pay the same directly to the local bodies.
However, before making such deduction, the Lessee shall have to give a notice in
writing, to the Lessor to show, within 15 days, that he is not in default in payment of
taxes to the local bodies.
8. The Government of India shall pay all charges in respect of electricity power, light
and water, used on the said premises during the continuance of these presents.
9. The Lessor shall execute necessary repairs usually made to premises in that
locality as and may be specified by the Government of India in a notice in writing
within such time as may be mentioned therein and if the Lessor fails to execute any
repairs in pursuance of the notice, the Government of India may cause the repairs
specified in the notice to be executed at the expense of the Lessor and the cost
thereof may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, be deducted from the
rent payable to the Lessor.
10. The Government of India may, at any time during the terms hereby created
and any renewal thereof, make such structural alterations to the existing buildings
such as partitions, office, fixtures and fittings as may be easily removable.
PROVIDED ALWAYS THAT such installations or other works, fittings and fixtures,
shall remain the property of the Government of India who shall be at liberty to
remove and appropriate to itself, any or all of them at the expiration of the terms
hereby created and any renewal thereof, provided further that the Government of
India shall again hand over the said premises in the same condition as they were in
at the commencement of these presents, fair wear and tear and damage by fire or
other causes beyond the control of the government of India excepted or at its option
pay compensation in lieu thereof PROVIDED FURTHER that such compensation
shall not exceed the value of the said premises on the date of the determination of
these presents, if they had remained in the same structural state.
11. The Government of India shall be released from paying any rent in respect of
the whole or any such part of the said premises as might be rendered uninhabitable
by fire, riots or other civil commotion, enemy action and/or other causes, not within
the control of the Government of India or acts of any Government or Municipal
Authority and in such cases the rent payable hereunder shall be accordingly
apportioned, or at its option the Government of India shall have power to terminate
these presents forthwith without prejudice to its rights to remove works, fittings,
fixtures and machinery under Clause 10 hereof.
12. The Government of India shall not be liable for loss of profit or loss of
goodwill arising from its occupation of the said premises or any amount of
compensation in respect of the said premises other than the rent payable as
aforesaid and the Lessor shall make no claim in respect thereof.
13. The Lessor agree with the Government of India that the latter paying the rent
hereby reserved, observing and performing the conditions and stipulations herein
contained on the Government of India’s part to be observed and performed shall
peacefully hold and enjoy the said premises during the said terms and any renewal
thereof without any interruption or disturbance from or by the Lessor or any person
claiming by through or under them.
14. If the Govt. of India shall be desirous of taking a new lease of the said
premises, after the expiration of the term hereby granted the Lessor will renew the
lease for a period mutually agreed upon between the Govt. of India and the Lessor, in
accordance with the covenants, agreements and conditions as in the present
agreement including the present for renewal.
“Provided that in the event of expiry of the terms of the lease, whenever an
action for renewal described above is pending with the lessee and the premises
remain in actual occupation, the payable rent at old rate shall continue to be
paid on provisional basis till the date of final decision on renewal or the date of
eviction, as the case may be and in case of renewal at different rate, suitable
adjustment by extra payment or deduction shall be permitted, to Lessee”.
“Provided further that the Lessee shall take action so far practicable to take a
new lease of the said premises within a period of six months after expiry of the
term hereby granted”.
15. The Government of India shall be entitled to terminate the lease at any time
giving to the Lessor three months previous notice in writing of its intention to do so.
16. Any notice to be made or given to the Government of India under these
present or in connection with the said premises shall be considered as duly given if
sent by the Lessor through the post by registered letter addressed to the
……………………………………………………………………………………………… on behalf
of the Government of India, and any notice to be given to the Lessor shall be
considered as duly given if sent by the Lessee through the post by registered letter
addressed to the Lessor at their last known place of abode. Any demand or notice
sent by post in either case shall be assumed to have been delivered in the usual
course of Post.
17. Should any dispute or difference arise concerning the subject matter of these
presents or interpretation of any covenant, clause or thing herein contained or
otherwise arising out of this lease agreement, the same shall be referred for
arbitration to the Tribunal, having, Sole Arbitrator. At the time of making a request
for reference of dispute to the arbitration, the claimant shall along with such request
send a panel of five persons to the other party. The other party shall within 15 days
of the receipt of such communication select one member of the panel to act as Sole
Arbitrator. In case none in the proposed panel is acceptable to the other party, such
other party shall within the above 15 days send another panel of five persons to
claimant, and the claimant shall be entitled to nominate the Sole Arbitrator from
among the panel sent by the opposite party. In case none of the members of this
panel is acceptable to the claimant, the Sole Arbitrator shall be appointed by the
Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, Government of India, Delhi. The provisions of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 with any statutory modification thereof and
rules framed there under shall be applicable to such arbitration proceedings which
shall be held at ………………… The arbitration proceedings shall be conducted in
Hindi/English/………………..*. The cost of the arbitration shall be borne as directed
by the Arbitral Tribunal. For the purposes of this clause, the officer mentioned in
clause 16 shall be authorized to act and nominate an arbitrator on behalf of the
Government of India.
18. This lease agreement has been executed in duplicate. One counterpart of the
lease agreement to be retained by the Lessee and the other by the Lessor.
THE SCHEDULE ‘A’ REFERRED TO ABOVE
All that the .................................... The .................................................... floor of
the building known as ....................... in the city of
........................................................ which building bear Municipal No
........................................................................ and is situated on plot/land bearing
Survey Nos. ..................... and is bound on or towards East by
............................................ on or towards West by ................... on or towards
North by ........................................................... or on towards South by
............................................................
THE SCHEDULE ‘B’ REFERRED TO ABOVE
IN WITNESS WHERE OF THE OFFICIAL SEAL OF has been affixed in the manner
hereinafter mentioned and the lease agreement has been signed for and on behalf of
the President of India on the day and year first above written by ………………………
……………………………………………. ………………………………………
(Signature)
For and on behalf of the President of India
In the presence of
Witnesses 1 ……………………….
2 ……………………….
And by the Lessor in presence of
(Signature)
Witnesses 1 ………………………. Name and Address of the Lessor
2 ………………………. (in case the Lessor is a company)
Firm or Society Add
For and on behalf of having authority
to sign on behalf of the Lessor………….
via resolution dated ................. of…...)
* Portions which are not applicable may be scored off at the time of filling up of the
Stand and Lease Agreement (SLA) format.